
--- PDF PAGE 13 (BOOK PAGE 1) ---
► 
Y
and the ice glistens white against the blue of 
the sky and the dark green of the pines. The 
ful pattern on the glassy surface of the ice. The 
day contribute to your ability to enjoy life to its full­
 
As you read, think about
► what is meant by the terms health and wrifaess.
how your behavior affects your level of wellness.
► how you can start to improve your health now.
Choosing
Wellness
blades of your skates sparkle as you cut a grace-
feeling of all your muscles working together as you
gather speed is exhilarating. Your cheeks are tin-
gling with the cold and the excitement. Your whole
body is alive with energy and good health.
Everyone wants to feel good and to have special
moments like these. The choices you make every
est. In this chapter, you'll find out how you can
choose and maintain the particular life style that
suits you— a life style that will keep you feeling fit,
energetic, and happy.
ou and your friend swoop and glide
over the lake like two brightly col-
ored birds. The air is clean and cold,
■■7
’< j' 
- - 
J 
1
The choices you make every day affect
your health now and in the future.
1

--- PDF PAGE 14 (BOOK PAGE 2) ---
/
ТА
5. Do you set aside time 
each day to relax?
 
1.
WHAT ARE HEALTH
AND WELLNESS?
What is health? How can I tell if I am healthy? Can I
control my own health? How can I influence my future
health? You may have just begun to ask yourself questions
like these. At one time you might have said that a healthy
person is anyone who does not have a cold or some other
illness. Now that you are older, you may feel that this defi-
nition does not include all the things that cause you to feel
well or to be healthy,
J
Aspects of Health
The term health has come to have a wider meaning than
it used to. It no longer means just the absence of illness.
Health is now used — and will be used in this book— to refer
to the well-being of your body, your mind, and your rela-
tionships with other people. These types of well-being are
called physical health, mental health, and social health. The
concept of health that includes all three of these aspects is
called wellness.
When you are physically healthy, you are able to carry
out everyday tasks without becoming overly tired. You have
enough energy to enjoy leisure activities and to meet emer-
gencies. If you are mentally healthy, you like yourself for
your achievements, and you learn from your mistakes. You
can cope with the demands of life and adjust to new situa-
tions. When you have healthy social relationships, you get
along well with others. You have friends, and you are ca-
pable of loving relationships. You respect the rights of others,
and you know how to give and accept help.
It is easy to see how the three aspects of wellness are
related. When you are ill or facing many problems and pres-
sures, your relationships with your friends and family may
suffer. Wrhen you are coming down with the flu, for example,
you may get upset if you are asked to do the dishes or take
out the garbage. If you are worried about an exam in a dif-
ficult subject, you may get a headache or stomachache. If
you are lonely and have few friends, you probably do not
feel good about yourself. You may even feel tired or overeat
because of your unhappiness.
This view of wellness as a combination of physical, men-
tal, and social well-being is also known as a holistic (hoh lis
tik) concept of health. Holistic means whole, and here it re-
fers to the connections among these three aspects of health
as they affect the whole person. People with a holistic view
of wellness are aware of and work to improve all three as-
pects of their health. They regard wellness as an important
goal, the result they want to achieve through their actions.
Check Your Wellness
Your level of wellness is high
if you can answer yes to the
following questions.
1. Do you eat a well-bal-
anced diet and avoid
foods high in fat, salt,
and sugar?
2. Do you participate in vig-
orous exercise at least
three times a week?
3. Is your weight within the
normal range for your
age, height, and sex?
4. Do you feel good about
yourself?
6. Do you avoid drugs, alco-
hol, and tobacco?
7. Do you get about eight
hours of restful sleep
each night?
8. Do you have close rela-
tives and friends you can
talk to?
9. Can you express your feel-
ings in healthful ways?
10. Do you use a seat belt
and avoid driving with a
person who is using drugs
or alcohol?
11. Do you try to lessen your
exposure to a in water,
and noise pollution?
12. Are your decisions based
on your own values and
goals, rather than those
of others?
2 Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 15 (BOOK PAGE 3) ---
Si®#
M Figure 1-1. Health includes your
physical, mental, and social
well-being.
Another way to express the holistic concept of wellness
is with the term quality of life. Quality of life refers to how
satisfying and rewarding your life is. Recently, this term has
received more attention in our society. One reason for this
increasing emphasis can be found in the length and condi-
tions of life that people have now come to expect, Look at
Figure 1-2. You can see that since 1900, the life expectancy
of Americans has increased by about 27 years. For much of
the history of the world, just staying alive and active until
age 47 was quite an accomplishment. Phis is still true in some
parts of the world today. You can imagine that people living
in areas of drought and food shortages are not concerned
about what we call quality of life. They are too busy just
trying to stay alive. In this country and other countries, how-
ever, many people are concerned about how they will feel
and what they can. accomplish and enjoy during these added
years of life expectancy. These people are concerned not only
about feeling good in the present but also about planning for
a lifetime of wellness.
What Determines Health
and Wellness
What are some of the factors that influence your wellness
and life expectancy? Can you control or influence any of
these factors?
To answer these questions, consider another set of sta-
tistics comparing 1900 to the present. The three leading
causes of death in 1900 were not the same as the leading
causes of death today. The leading causes of death then were
diseases that could be passed from one person to another,
Figure 1-2. Americans live longer
today than ever before.
Life Expectancy
74.7
1985
73.7
1980
69.7
1960
X.
£
1940
62.9
54.1
1920
1900
47
r r -
1 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i
0 40 
50 
60 
70 
30
Expected Life Span (years)
Sourtt: Statistical htwlrKt otthe United States, 1987
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 
3

--- PDF PAGE 16 (BOOK PAGE 4) ---
Figure 1-3. Today, many of the
leading causes of death are
influenced by life-style choices.
Leading Causes of Death
1900
Today
1. Pneumonia and
influenza
2. Tuberculosis
3. Diseases of the stomach
and intestines
4. Heart disease
5. Stroke
6. Kidney disease
7. Accidents
8. Cancer
9. Childhood diseases
10. Diphtheria
1. Heart disease
2. Cancer
3. Stroke
4. Accidents
5. Lung disease
6. Pneumonia and
influenza
7. Diabetes mellitus
8. Suicide
9. Liver disease
10. Atherosclerosis
as shown in Figure 1-3. In contrast, today's leading causes
of death are diseases that arc strongly influenced by your
individual life style, the way you choose to live your life.
As you will see, the way you choose to live your life
strongly influences the quality of your life, both now and in
the future. Of course, some other factors also influence your
health and wellness. These include heredity, environment,
and culture, but even these factors are affected to some extent
by your life-style decisions.
HEREDITY To some extent, heredity, all the traits that are
passed on biologically from parent to child, determines a per-
son's level of wellness. These traits include hair color, eye
color, height, build, and many other characteristics. Heredity
also influences the soundness of your body, your reactions
to stressful situations, and the aging process.
As you probably know, some disabilities, diseases, and
tendencies toward certain illnesses are inherited. Although
inherited disabilities put some limits on an individual's level
of wellness, there are still many things a person can do to
reach his or her optimum (ahp tuh mum) health, the highest
level of wellness possible. Many disabled people are ener-
getic and productive and enjoy a high quality of life in spite
of their disabilities.
Overcoming a disability is an extreme example of using
mental, social, and physical resources to make up for a lim-
itation. There are also less dramatic examples. For example,
some people inherit a tendency toward high blood pressure,
a condition that can contribute to heart disease and shorten
life. If they are aware of their condition and know how to
cope with it, they carr make diet and other life-style changes
to control their blood pressure. Their actions allow them to
lead long and healthy lives in spite of this inherited tendency.
Although heredity affects health, life-
style choices are often more important in
determining overall wellness.
4 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 17 (BOOK PAGE 5) ---
Except in a small number of cases, heredity does not
prevent a person from enjoying a healthy life. For most peo-
ple, the life-style choices they make every day are far more
important than heredity in maintaining, harming, or improv-
ing their wellness.
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT Your environment is all
your surroundings and the influences they have on you. To
be healthy, everyone needs a healthful physical environ-
ment, or physical surroundings. You know that climate,
extreme heat or cold, and extremely dry or damp air can
affect your wellness. It is also true that air pollution, water
pollution, radiation, and even loud noise can injure your
health. If you are aware of environmental hazards, you can
take steps to protect yourself. You can avoid swimming in
polluted water, wTear a sunscreen for protection against the
sun's rays, and always keep your radio's volume at less-than-
harmful levels.
You can also take steps to make your environment
healthier. Everyone should be aware of the dangers of a pol-
luted environment and help to limit or decrease pollution.
That includes disposing of waste materials correctly, bicy-
cling or walking short distances instead of driving, and
recycling paper goods, cans, and bottles. Some teenagers are
part of environmental watch groups that keep track of air
and water cleanliness in their communities.
Your physical environment includes the environment in-
doors as well as outdoors. Your home, school, and workplace
are part of your physical environment. Cigarette smoking in
public places and disease-causing organisms in restaurant
food are some indoor hazards of the physical environment.
Your own knowledge and behavior can help make your
physical environment safer. How could you and your friends
contribute to improving the environment of your school cafe- z
teria or a local park?
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT Your environment is made up
of more than your physical surroundings. The people around
you— your family, friends, and other people you spend time
with— make up another part of your environment, your so-
cial environment.
When you were a child, your parents were the major
part of your social environment. They taught you to speak
and to communicate in other ways. They strongly influenced
your feelings about yourself and your ideas of how to get
along with other people. In addition, they probably taught
you health habits that are so basic you do not even think
about them anymore. Washing your hands before eating or
fixing a meal, for example, may have become routine; but
now you understand that these habits help to prevent the
spread of germs.
Mind Over Illness?
Do emotions and thoughts play
a role in helping the body ward
off disease? The new field of
psychoneuroimmunology (PNI)
suggests they might.
PNI researchers are now ex-
ploring the two-way connection
between the brain and the
immune system, the body's de-
fense against disease. The
brain's network of nerves re-
leases many chemicals, some of
which depend on mood. These
chemicals bind directly to the
disease-fighting cells of the im-
mune system and influence how
the cells behave. Immune cells
are more active when a person's
mood is good than when he or
she is depressed.
The immune cells send chemi-
cal messages back to the brain.
These chemicals affect sleep,
body temperature, heart rate,
and mood.
PNI supports common beliefs.
A person with a positive attitude
combats disease better than
someone who has "lost the will
to live." Good health and a pos-
itive outlook tend to reinforce
each other. While wellness may
not be "all in your mind," PNI
has found that there is a close
connection.
What role does mood play in
fighting disease?
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 5

--- PDF PAGE 18 (BOOK PAGE 6) ---
 
► 
As you have grown older, your social environment has
expanded to include your neighbors and schoolmates. Your
teachers, relatives, friends, and those involved in the com-
munity activities you participate in are an important part of
your social environment.
You have probably heard a lot of talk about peer pres-
sure. Traditionally, the word peers has meant equals, those
people who are in the same situation as you. Today, it is
often used to mean your friends, or a larger group of ac-
quaintances your own age. The friends you select from
Your friends, or peers, have an important 
among your acquaintances can have an important effect on
effect on your wellness. 
your level of wellness. Friends who practice unhealthful be-
haviors can put a lot of pressure on you to do the same. It
is sometimes difficult to stand up to that kind of pressure.
Selecting friends who choose healthful habits and life styles
makes it easier for you to choose wellness.
CULTURE Your social environment is only one part of
your culture. Culture is all the ideas, customs, and ways of
living that characterize a particular group of people. That
group may be a nation, a region of a country, or an ethnic
group. Culture includes accents and food preferences, atti-
tudes and manners.
Sometimes you are not aware of the characteristics of
your own culture until you come in contact with another
’ 
culture. You probably do not think you have an accent until
you visit a part of the country where people speak differ-
ently. In some cultures, it is rude to take off your shoes when
Figure 1-4. Do your friends help you
to make healthful decisions?
6 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 19 (BOOK PAGE 7) ---
w
F#
A_Y
visiting someone else's house; in other cultures it is rude not
to. In some cultures, people eat little or no meat; in others,
meat is centra! to the diet. This is just one example of how
cultural differences can affect your health. Can you think of
other examples?
Sometimes, you may get "mixed messages" from your
culture- For example, our culture emphasizes the value of
health and fitness. At the same time, it suggests that un-
healthful behaviors, such as smoking and drinking, are fun
and part of a healthful life style. You have probably seen
advertisements with young, healthy-Iooking people trying to
promote products that are not really good for your health.
Because your culture offers you so many choices, you must
be informed about what promotes health and what does not.
This way you will be able to make your own choices without
being influenced by misleading messages.
Figure 1-5. The culture in which you
live can affect your health in many
ways.
The culture in which you five affects the
healthful choices you make.
Section Review
1. What are the three aspects of wellness?
2. What is a holistic view of health?
3. How are the three leading causes of death today dif-
ferent from those of 1900?
4. What factors determine your health? Which of these
factors can you control?
What Do You Think?
5. What are two ways you could improve your physical
health? Your mental health? Your social health?
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 
7

--- PDF PAGE 20 (BOOK PAGE 8) ---
i
▲
2. YOU AND YOUR HEALTH
If there were just a few painless habits you could choose
to practice that would lead to a long and healthy life, of
course you would practice them. Even if there were no ab-
solute guarantee of good health, just a greater probability of
it, the choice would still be worthwhile.
Such a choice does not come from a fairy-tale land of
magic potions that protects the user from disaster. It is a real
choice you can make in your daily life. One way to judge the
changes in your health that your daily life-style choices can
make — for the better as well as for the worse— is to use the
Illness-Wellness continuum.
The Illness-Wellness Continuum
Remember the last time you were coming down with, the
flu? You could feel it beginning, perhaps with a runny nose
or general tiredness. Then, your symptoms became worse
and your energy level dropped lower. You might have run
a fever and had to stay in bed. After several days, your fever
broke, you felt more energetic, and your cough no longer
kept you awake at night. You might have been a bit tired
and sniffly still, but you were feeling better. Finally, you felt
great again. You moved from having the sniffles to walking
around with a cold to lying in bed with a fever and cough to
being up and around with a few symptoms to regaining well-
ness. You can think of the sequence you followed — from
wellness to illness and back again— as a continuum (kun tin
yoo urn), a progression in either direction from one stage
(sniffles) to another (walking around with a cold) to another,
and so on.
Continuums can represent other health-related changes
in your life. How would you use a continuum to express
changes you might experience when you start (or stop) an
exercise program? How could a continuum show the changes
brought on by your moving away from friends to a new
school or by failing to make the swim team?
Your overall wellness also can be illustrated on a con-
tinuum. This sliding scale is called the Illness-Wellness
continuum. Look at Figure 1-7. Notice that on the Illness-
Wellness continuum, you can move in either direction. As
you move in one direction, you move toward illness; as you
move the other way, you approach wellness. You can see
also that there is a midpoint on the continuum. At this neu-
tral point, a person is not sick but is not enjoying the full
benefits of optimum health, either.
At one time, as you learned earlier, many people in this
country were satisfied just to be at the neutral point of health.
Then, people were much more concerned about avoiding ill-
ness than about improving the quality of their lives. Today,
Figure 1-6. Eating nutritiously is one
way to improve the quality of
your life.
8 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 21 (BOOK PAGE 9) ---
Illness-Wellness Continuum
Neutral Point
Neither ill nor well
Wellness-
Long Life
high quality
of fife
Increasing
Risk
Behaviors
Increasing
Wellness
Behaviors
Illness-
Early Death
Poor quality
of life
Source: Adapted from Travrj $nd ftyjn. The WeWwii Wwtb&Ok. 1903
achieving a higher level of wellness and a better quality of
life is possible for many of the people in this country. More
than ever before, people today control where on the Illness-
Wellness continuum they fall,
Risk Behaviors
Look again at the IHness-Wellness continuum in Figure
1-7. You can see that a risk behavior, or an action that in-
creases the chances of a harmful outcome, moves you toward
the illness-early death end of the continuum. You are prob-
ably aware of many risks to your health and do your best to
avoid them. For example, you know it is dangerous to run
across a four-lane highway. You also know that wearing a
seat belt in a car will reduce your risk of injury in case of
accident, but do you always remember to use one? If you do
not, you are taking a risk that moves you toward the illness-
early death end of the continuum. Perhaps thinking about
your behavior in these terms will change your mind about
some of the unnecessary risks you take.
Most activities have varying degrees of risk. For exam-
ple, if you exercise vigorously without doing warm-ups first,
you risk pulling a muscle. If you ride a motorcycle without
a helmet, you risk serious injury and death.
Sometimes, risks are worth taking if there is a benefit
greater than the possible harm. Skiing, for example, involves
some risk of injury, but many people decide that this enjoy-
able and healthful activity is worth the risk. They also may
realize that equipment, instruction, fitness, and attitude can
lessen their risks while skiing. It is always worthwhile to
think carefully about any activities that involve risks before
you do them.
Figure 1-7. Where along the Illness-
Wellness continuum would you place
yourself? How could you move closer
to wellness?
Risk behaviors increase the chances of
illness and early death.
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 9

--- PDF PAGE 22 (BOOK PAGE 10) ---
A
Figure 1-8. Every activity involves a
degree of risk. How could these
people lessen their risks?
Not all risk behaviors involve immediate threats to your
physical safety. Eating an unbalanced diet is a risk behavior.
As you may know, the typical fast-food meal contains a great
deal of salt, fat, and sugar. Eating a meal like this too fre-
quently may cause you to put on too much weight. Living
on a diet of fast food may lead to more serious, long-term
health problems, such as cancer and heart disease. How far
along the Illness-Wellness continuum do you think one fast-
food meal per week would move you? What about two meals
per day? You will learn more about the effects of dietary risk
factors in Chapters 8 and 9.
Another set of risks to your wellness involves mental
and social health. Keeping anger or other strong emotions
"bottled up" inside can risk both your mental and social well-
being, It is much better for your health to express your feel-
ings by talking with someone you trust. Your relationships
with others will also benefit. Strong negative feelings, when
not communicated, can harm a relationship, causing resent-
ment, jealousy, and arguments. You will learn more about
the healthy expression of emotions in Chapter 2 and about
communication skills in Chapter 5.
U 
I
A risk factor that does not pose an
immediate threat to your health may
have a long-term effect.
Moving Along the Continuum
To achieve a better quality of life, you need to know
about, choose, and practice behaviors that promote w ellness.
You also should be aware of your own particular conditions
and needs. Awareness is the first step toward making health-
ful choices and decisions. The second step is acquiring the
10 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 23 (BOOK PAGE 11) ---
▲
knowledge you need to promote your own wellness. Some
of this knowledge is general information, such as the benefits
of regular exercise, and some knowledge may relate to your
particular circumstances, such as the proper diet for gaining
weight. You also need to be able to distinguish between risk
behaviors, which lead away from wellness, and healthful be-
haviors, which lead toward wellness. The last step is
applying your awareness and knowledge by making health-
ful choices and then taking action on those choices.
The remainder of this chapter, and the chapters that fol-
low, will show you how to gain an awareness of your own
health, how to acquire and evaluate health-related knowl-
edge, and howr to decide which behaviors best promote your
health. Finally, you will learn how to turn your decisions
into □ healthful life style.
AWARENESS How do you become aware of your own
level of wellness? In some cases, you know when you have
a health problem. Yoli know when your ankle hurts or when
you have a sunburn. You are probably aware that some
symptoms require medical attention and some do not.
Other medical problems do not show up so readily. You
should have regular check-ups to detect early signs of illness
you might not be aware of. At these check-ups, you will
probably discuss your life style, including what you eat, how
much you sleep, how much exercise you do, and whether or
not you smoke. Together, you and your doctor can deter-
mine if you are at risk for certain health problems because of
your life-style choices.
You may even discuss some of your feelings with your
doctor. If you are depressed, for example, it is worthwhile
to discover why* Feeling "low" all the time can be the cause
or the result of a physical problem. If you are unhappy be-
cause of something that cannot be changed, such as the death
of a loved one, the support of friends or professionals may
help you to understand and accept your feelings.
Learning what questions to ask of your doctor and of
yourself is an important step toward health self-awareness.
The Check Your Wellness inventory at the beginning of this
chapter should give you a good start. How well did you do
on the inventory? What other questions might you ask your-
self about your health? What questions might you ask your
doctor or other health professional?
KNOWLEDGE Knowledge about health is growing every
day. New discoveries and research studies appear in the
news ail the time. Some of this knowledge— about the dan-
gers of overexposure to sunlight, for example— is important
to everyone. Some, such as the development of new medi-
cations, is useful to the professionals who prescribe them.
Other information, such as research on the harmful effects
Figure 1-9. Are you aware of how
your behaviors affect your health?
Together, you and your doctor can
evaluate how your Iffe-styEe chokes
affect your health.
chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 
1 1

--- PDF PAGE 24 (BOOK PAGE 12) ---
t
 
 
 
of a particular fad diet is important to people who may try
it. You need to be able to sort out the knowledge that might
apply to your lite.
Some sources of health information are more reliable
than others. Which is a better source of knowledge, an ad-
vertisement for a quick weight-loss diet or a study of weight
loss in a scholarly journal? While the answer to that question
is obvious, the value of other sources of information may not
be as easy to determine.
This book gives ydU a good foundation of heal th -related
knowledge. It also suggests how you can evaluate other
health information you receive. It is up to you to stay in-
formed about things that affect your wellness! The process
of updating your knowledge is one you will need to continue
throughout your life.
BEHAVIOR CHOICES Even with awareness and knowl-
edge, it is not always easy to decide on the best course of
action. In the earlier discussion of risks, the action of running
across a highway presents a clear risk, but the skiing example
is more complicated. Many behaviors have both positive and
negative results, and you must choose between them. Sup-
pose you were an inexperienced skier invited to ski a run
known for its difficulty. Your best friend, a good skier, could
not go on the trip if you did not go. Add some more com-
plications, such as bad weather, or an upcoming exam for
which you need to study, or alcohol being consumed in the
car Real life is full of such complications. How would you
decide what to do?
Awareness of your own skiing ability is essential in this
example. Knowledge of the dangers of driving or skiing in
bad weather is also important, but even more important is
knowledge about the extreme risk of drinking and driving.
But, what about your friend or your exam? Here you must
consider your values, the things most important to you. You
value friendship, but you also value your own and your
friend's safety. You value doing well in school, and so do
your parents. Your decisions not only affect you, they affect
other people, their health, and their values.
The DECIDE process described in the Health Skills on
page 16 provides a step-by-step procedure that can help to
make hard decisions easier. Look at the DECIDE process and
review the steps. How could you apply these steps to the
skiing example?
SKILLS 
What would you think of a baseball team that
spent all its time thinking and learning about the game but
never played? Do you think that the team would win many
games without practice? Of course not. Many people think
that knowing about healthful behavior is enough to guar-
antee good health. This is not true, Like the baseball players,
Updating your knowledge of things that
affect your wellness is a lifelong
responsibility.
1 2 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 25 (BOOK PAGE 13) ---
*
4  Figure 1-10. The only way to master 
a skill is through practice.
iff
-If <
a
you have to practice. To have good health, you must apply
the healthful decisions you have made.
One qua lit}' a successful baseball player needs is skill.
Awareness of natural talent, knowledge of the game, and a
good choice of bat are not much good without the skill to hit
a curve ball or lay down a bunt. How do baseball players
develop new skills? They usually begin by observing and
analyzing their current behavior. Next, they make changes.
Then, there is practice and more practice.
Just like the baseball player who worked to change his
or her swing, you may have some habits you wish to change.
A habit is a pattern of behavior that has become automatic
and is hard to break. It is possible, however, to break old
habits by learning new skills. With practice, your new skills
will become just as natural as the old habits had been. The
Health Skills in this book will help you to develop the skills
you need to put decisions for wellness into action.
To put your decisions into action, you
must have the skills necessary it do so
Section Review
1. What is the Illness-Wellness continuum?
2. What is a risk behavior? Give an example of an im-
mediate risk and a long-term risk.
3. What steps should a person take to move toward the
wellness side of the Illness- Wellness continuum?
What Do You Think?
4. Where do you think you are on the Illness-Wellness
continuum? List five behaviors that you currently prac-
tice that influence your level of wellness.
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 13

--- PDF PAGE 26 (BOOK PAGE 14) ---
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
A
 
3. TAKING CONTROL
OF YOUR HEALTH
Now is the time for you to start taking control of your
own health. In the last few years, as you have become more
physically and emotionally mature, you have also become
more independent. You have begun to make many of the
decisions that used to be made for you by your parents and
other adults. How many of your own food choices do you
now make, for example? Who decides how much exercise
you should do? Who chooses your friends? Who decides
what yo j do with your friends? More and more, the answer
is you.
Accepting Responsibility
Now that you have so much control over your own life,
you also need to accept responsibility for it. Begin by learning
the answers to these two questions: What are the leading
causes of death among teenagers today? What are the risk
behaviors associated with these deaths?
In Figure 1-11, you can see that the three most common
causes of teenage death arc not illness. Would you be sur-
prised to learn that there is a risk behavior common to al!
three? That risk behavior is substance abuse, the use of al-
cohol or drugs. Most fatal accidents, for example, involve
cars, and nearly half of all car accidents involve alcohol or
drugs. Many suicides, too, are related to substance abuse.
Homicide also is often tied to drugs and alcohol. The im-
Leading Causes
of Death Among
Teenagers
Accidents
Suicide
Homicide
Cancer
Heart disease
Birth defects
Stroke
Pneumonia and influenza
Lung disease
Diabetes mellitus
Figure 1-11. Risk behaviors account
for the majority of teenage deaths.
Figure 1-12. Drinking and driving is a ►
risk that is never worth taking.
14 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 27 (BOOK PAGE 15) ---
 
paired judgment of people under the influence of drugs or
alcohol can lead to violent behavior.
Some other risk behaviors also contribute to the rate of
death among teenagers, These include: taking chances for
(he fun of it; being unwilling or unable to talk about problems
or to ask for help; and accepting a known risk just to be one
of the crowd. You will learn more about each of these risk
behaviors throughout this book.
Some of these risk behaviors contribute to another set of
health threats to teenagers: unwanted pregnancy and sex-
ually transmitted diseases. All of these problems have a
major impact on physical, mental, and social health. They
affect not only the quality of your life but that of others.
Making responsible decisions about relationships of all
kinds, including sexual ones, is an important sign of matu-
rity. It shows that you are beginning to take control of your
own health. Thinking about the possible effects of your ac-
tions before you take them may be difficult, but it is an
important thing to do.
Looking Ahead
Considering the long-term effects of your behavior is an-
other sign of maturity. Earlier in this chapter, you looked at
the statistics on life expectancy and causes of death for adults
today. The decisions you make and the behaviors you prac-
tice now are already influencing the length and quality of life
you can expect in the future.
The most common killers of adults today are health con-
ditions that can be strongly influenced by life style. Life-style
choices include diet, exercise, and the use of tobacco, alcohol,
and other drugs. Your current and future health depend
largely on the decisions you are starting to make now. Learn-
ing to make decisions for wellness and to practice healthful
behaviors is a wise investment that you can make in yourself
and your future. It is an investment that pays the highest
reward— the reward of good health.
1
t■w
Figure 1-13. Responsible decision-
making means thinking about all the
possible consequences of your
actions.
Considering the long-term effects of your
behavior is a sign of maturity.
Section Review
1. What are the three most common causes of teenage
death today?
2. What kind of accidents kill the most teenagers?
3. What risk behavior is often associated with the three
leading causes of teenage death?
What Do You Think?
4. What life-style changes could you make now to im-
prove your future quality of life?
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 15

--- PDF PAGE 28 (BOOK PAGE 16) ---
^ 
D I E I С I I I  E ll
 
 
HEALTH SKILLS |
Making a Decision
Suppose you had to make this decision: You've just found
the perfect after-school job. It's near home, it's fun to do,
and it will pay for the bicycle you need for your bicycling
trip next summer Then you make the basketball team
that you've tried out for three times. Unfortunately, the
team practices during the same hours as your job. How
should you choose between the team and the job?
Although many of your choices are not this compli-
cated, you sometimes face even harder decisions. They
require much thought and soul-searching because they
can make important differences in your life. Do you some-
times "hide from" tough choices because they make you
feel anxious? Do you ever rush headlong into decisions
without really thinking them through? There is a process,
called DECIDE, that makes decision-making easier. This
process is simple to remember because each letter in the
word DECIDE stands for a step in the process.
1. 
efine the Problem
Look carefully at the decision ;
you arc facing, and state the ■
issue clearly. Is it important
and complex enough to war- ;
rant using DECIDE? Some ;
choices are too easy. You al- ■
ready know what to do. Others
don't really make much differ- ;
ence, a flip of a coin would do. *
2. Explore the
Alternatives
Make a list of all possible alter-
natives 
for 
solving 
your
problem. Be sure to include
"doing nothing" if it is appro-
priate. If you 
need 
more
information to fully under-
stand some alternatives, do the
research now. You may find
some choices unrealistic; do
not include them.
3. Consider the
Consequences
One by one, think through
what might happen with each
alternative. List both positive
and negative results. Consider
what probably would happen,
not what you hope would hap-
pen. Ask yourself: How risky
is each alternative? What are
its chances of success? How
16 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 29 (BOOK PAGE 17) ---
 
 
 
would it affect my future? Re-
* 
*
member to consider the effects *
on other people.
. 4. dentity Your Values
' Your values, the things you be- "
, lieve in strongly, affect how ■
‘ you live your life and how you 1
‘ feel about yourself.
Sometimes, your valuer in- *
* fluence your decisions even .
* when you are not aware of '
■ them. At other times, you may ■
- overlook your values when *
; you want something badly.
; When you do this, though, ;
■ your values often affect how ■
you feel about the decision ‘
later on. 
‘
Think about your long-term •
goals as well as the beliefs of .
your family, religion, and com- '
munity. Consider your own
and others' health and safety, *
and your self-respect. Which '
of the choices are most in line ;
with your values?
Tough decisions are easier to make using the DECIDE process.
APPLY THE SKILL
1. Imagine that you fatje the
decision introduced at the be-
ginning of this feature— to
choose the job or the team. Fol-
low the steps of DECIDE to
determine what you would do
in this situation. Write out
your answers for steps 1
through 5. Be sure to consider
all alternatives; there may be
more than two. (For example,
it may be possible to postpone
a choice or to take another
route to a goal.) Don't forget to
include the stop to act on your
decision,
2. List other difficult, im-
portant decisions for which
DECIDE might be useful. Do
they fall into categories? What
categories of decisions would
not be suitable for DECIDE?
3. Set up a possible situation
like the one in the beginning of
this feature, tn other words,
imagine a person facing a com-
plicated, important decision.
Include enough information
about the problem to show that
it is a tough choice Then use
DECIDE to work through the
decision-making process.
Remember, at some limes
there is more than one ""right""
choice. Your particular values,
skills, background, and pref-
erences all help determine
what is right for you.
4. Consider a tough decision
you have made in the past or
one you are facing now. Use
DECIDE to determine what
you should do (or should have
done). 
Write out 
steps 1
through 5.
Did DECIDE help you fo-
cus on important values or
choices you might otherwise
have overlooked? Which ones?
Did DECIDE make the deci-
sion-making process easier?
Why or why not?
I 5. Decide and Act
* Use the information you have *
. collected to compare each of *
; the alternatives. Decide which *
* one is best for you ►
Act on your decision by first ’
' breaking it down into smaller 1
; steps, and then setting a real- •
* istic deadline for accomplish- *
. ing each step. Then, follow ’
; through with your plan. 
;
* 
«
* 6. valuate the Results
' How did your decision work ;
* out? What are its effects on *
' your life? On others? What did ’
' you learn? What would you do ;
; differently? If you can change ;
* some aspect of the result for ■
, the better, do it now. 
*
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 
1 7

--- PDF PAGE 30 (BOOK PAGE 18) ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
g 
II
Chapter
Review
Chapter Summary
8 Health is more than the absence of disease;
it is the well-being of your body, mind, and
relationships with other people.
■ The holistic concept of wellness emphasizes
the connection between physical health,
mental health, and social health.
■ Your behavior, or life style, has the strongest
influence on your level of wellness. Other
factors that influence your level of wellness
include heredity, physical and social envi-
ronment, and culture.
■ Your level of wellness can be illustrated on a
continuum known as the Illness-Wellness
continuum. As you move in one direction,
you move toward illness or early death. As
you move in the other direction, you move
toward overall wellness. At the midpoint,
you are neither ill nor well.
■ Risk behaviors increase the chances of illness
or death. It is important to analyze the risks
of an activity before doing it.
■ You can change your level of wellness by
increasing your self-awareness, acquiring
knowledge, making healthful behavior
choices, and practicing and using skills.
■ ( he major health hazards for teenagers
include accidents, homicide, suicide, un-
wanted pregnancy, sexually transmitted
diseases, and drug and alcohol abuse.
■ The life-style decisions you make and carry
out now affect both your current level of
wellness and your future quality of life.
Vocabulary Review
Listed below are some of the important terms in this chapter. Choose the phrase that best describes
the term in the exercise that follows.
continuum
heredity
culture
holistic
environment
Illness-Wellness
goal
habit
continuum
life style 
risk behavior
optimum health 
values
physical environment 
wellness
quality of life
6. an action that increases the chance of a
harmful outcome
7. all the traits passed on biologically from
parent to child
8. a pattern of behavior that has become
automatic and hard to change
9. all the ideas, customs, and ways of living
that characterize a group of people
1(E the highest level of wellness
1. the way or style in which you choose to
live your life
2. all your surroundings and the influence
they have on you
3. the well-being of your body, mind, and
relationships with other people
4. a sliding scale that illustrates your overall
level of wellness
5. whole
What Have You Learned?
1. Briefly describe three characteristics of
mental health.
2, Give an example of how the three aspects
of health are interrelated.
3. How much has the average life expectancy
of Americans increased since 1900?
4. How can heredity affect your overall level
of health?
18 
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness

--- PDF PAGE 31 (BOOK PAGE 19) ---
 
 
------------------------------------------------------
 
 
~
 
k 
 
5. List three possible health hazards in the
physical environment. Explain how you can
protect yourself from them.
6. Define peer pressure and explain how it
can affect your health.
7. Use a continuum to illustrate a health-
related change in your life.
8. List three risk behaviors that can be fatal.
9. Briefly describe a situation in which a risk
is worth taking and explain why.
10. What are two ways to become aware of
your owrn level of wellness?
11. What are two good sources of knowledge
about health?
12. Explain how values can affect a health-
related decision.
What Do You Think?
1. Describe a problem you recently had to
face. Then explain how your physical mental,
and social well-being played a part in reacting
to the problem and in resolving it.
2. In spite of all the knowledge available
about the health risks of smoking, many
teenagers still smoke. Why do you think this is
so? What argument against smoking do you
think would be the most effective for teens?
3. Compare a TV, magazine, or newspaper ad
promoting a healthful behavior with one for
an un healthful activity. How do the ads try to
influence your behavior?
4. Some people say that teenagers do not take
the dangers of risk behaviors seriously. They
behave as though they think that harm only
comes to other people. Do you think this is
true or not? Give three examples to support
your opinion.
5. Give some thought to the term quality of
life. What five elements do you think arc most
important to your quality of life? Why?
What Would You Do?
1 . You have a friend who lives on junk food
arid smokes cigarettes. He says he knows
these behaviors are not harming him because
he feels fine. What would you tell him?
2. You are not getting along with your friends
or family. Often, you want to be alone. Should
you seek help? brom whom? Explain.
3. All your friends are drinking a diet supple-
ment instead of eating regular meals. When
you ask about the diet, they give you the
brochure that came with supplement. How
For Further Study
1. Find out wrhat is meant by the term
preiwif/w medicine. How does preventive
medicine lead to optimum health?
2. Research the disease tuberculosis. Find out
the cause of the disease and what environmen-
tal and social conditions led to its being a
''killer disease" in 1900. Then, explain why
tuberculosis of the lungs, or consumption, is
no longer a major threat in this country.
3. Look in the library for reliable sources of
information about health; ask a librarian for
help, if necessary. Select three sources and
explain why they are reliable.
would you make a well-informed decision
about this diet?
4. You are happy with your current state of
wellness, but you want to be healthy in the
future, too. What actions can you take now to
promote your future well-being?
5. You have diabetes, a condition that limits
the amount of sugar your body can process.
You need to restrict your diet and check vour
blood-sugar levels. How can you achieve
optimum wellness?
*
■ r '■
Chapter 1 Choosing Wellness 1 9
