Choosing Wellness",
  text: "### As You Read, Think About\n- what is meant by the terms health and wellness.\n- how your behavior affects your level of wellness.\n- how you can start to improve your health now.\nYou and your friend swoop and glide over the lake like two brightly colored birds. The air is clean and cold, and the ice glistens white against the blue of the sky and the dark green of the pines. The blades of your skates sparkle as you cut a graceful pattern on the glassy surface of the ice. The feeling of all your muscles working together as you gather speed is exhilarating. Your cheeks are tingling with the cold and the excitement. Your whole body is alive with energy and good health.\nEveryone wants to feel good and to have special moments like these. The choices you make every day contribute to your ability to enjoy life to its fullest. In this chapter, you'll find out how you can choose and maintain the particular life style that suits you\u2014a life style that will keep you feeling fit, energetic, and happy.\n### Check Your Wellness\nYour level of wellness is high if you can answer yes to the following questions.\n- 1. Do you eat a well-balanced diet and avoid foods high in fat, salt, and sugar?\n- 2. Do you participate in vigorous exercise at least three times a week?\n- 3. Is your weight within the normal range for your age, height, and sex?\n- 4. Do you feel good about yourself?\n- 5. Do you set aside time each day to relax?\n- 6. Do you avoid drugs, alcohol, and tobacco?\n- 7. Do you get about eight hours of restful sleep each night?\n- 8. Do you have close relatives and friends you can talk to?\n- 9. Can you express your feelings in healthful ways?\n- 10. Do you use a seat belt and avoid driving with a person who is using drugs or alcohol?\n- 11. Do you try to lessen your exposure to air, water, and noise pollution?\n- 12. Are your decisions based on your own values and goals, rather than those of others?\n## 1. What Are Health and Wellness?\nWhat is health? How can I tell if I am healthy? Can I control my own health? How can I influence my future health? You may have just begun to ask yourself questions like these. At one time you might have said that a healthy person is anyone who does not have a cold or some other illness. Now that you are older, you may feel that this definition does not include all the things that cause you to feel well or to be healthy.\n### Aspects of Health\nThe term health has come to have a wider meaning than it used to. It no longer means just the absence of illness. Health is now used\u2014and will be used in this book\u2014to refer to the well-being of your body, your mind, and your relationships with other people. These types of well-being are called physical health, mental health, and social health. The concept of health that includes all three of these aspects is called wellness.\nWhen you are physically healthy, you are able to carry out everyday tasks without becoming overly tired. You have enough energy to enjoy leisure activities and to meet emergencies. If you are mentally healthy, you like yourself for your achievements, and you learn from your mistakes. You can cope with the demands of life and adjust to new situations. When you have healthy social relationships, you get along well with others. You have friends, and you are capable of loving relationships. You respect the rights of others, and you know how to give and accept help.\nIt is easy to see how the three aspects of wellness are related. When you are ill or facing many problems and pressures, your relationships with your friends and family may suffer. When you are coming down with the flu, for example, you may get upset if you are asked to do the dishes or take out the garbage. If you are worried about an exam in a difficult subject, you may get a headache or stomachache. If you are lonely and have few friends, you probably do not feel good about yourself. You may even feel tired or overeat because of your unhappiness.\nThis view of wellness as a combination of physical, mental, and social well-being is also known as a holistic (hoh lis tik) concept of health. Holistic means whole, and here it refers to the connections among these three aspects of health as they affect the whole person. People with a holistic view of wellness are aware of and work to improve all three aspects of their health. They regard wellness as an important goal, the result they want to achieve through their actions. M\nAnother way to express the holistic concept of wellness is with the term quality of life. Quality of life refers to how satisfying and rewarding your life is. Recently, this term has received more attention in our society. One reason for this increasing emphasis can be found in the length and conditions of life that people have now come to expect. Look at Figure 1-2. You can see that since 1900, the life expectancy of Americans has increased by about 27 years. For much of the history of the world, just staying alive and active until age 47 was quite an accomplishment. This is still true in some parts of the world today. You can imagine that people living in areas of drought and food shortages are not concerned about what we call quality of life. They are too busy just trying to stay alive. In this country and other countries, however, many people are concerned about how they will feel and what they can accomplish and enjoy during these added years of life expectancy. These people are concerned not only about feeling good in the present but also about planning for a lifetime of wellness.\n> Figure 1-2 \u2014 Life expectancy in the United States. 1900: 47 years \u00b7 1920: 54.1 \u00b7 1940: 62.9 \u00b7 1960: 69.7 \u00b7 1980: 73.7 \u00b7 1985: 74.7. Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1987.\n### What Determines Health and Wellness\nWhat are some of the factors that influence your wellness and life expectancy? Can you control or influence any of these factors?\nTo answer these questions, consider another set of statistics comparing 1900 to the present. The three leading causes of death in 1900 were not the same as the leading causes of death today. The leading causes of death then were diseases that could be passed from one person to another, as shown in Figure 1-3. In contrast, today's leading causes of death are diseases that are strongly influenced by your individual life style, the way you choose to live your life. As you will see, the way you choose to live your life strongly influences the quality of your life, both now and in the future.\n> Figure 1-3 \u2014 Leading causes of death. In 1900: 1. Pneumonia and influenza \u00b7 2. Tuberculosis \u00b7 3. Diseases of the stomach and intestines \u00b7 4. Heart disease \u00b7 5. Stroke \u00b7 6. Kidney disease \u00b7 7. Accidents \u00b7 8. Cancer \u00b7 9. Childhood diseases \u00b7 10. Diphtheria. Today: 1. Heart disease \u00b7 2. Cancer \u00b7 3. Stroke \u00b7 4. Accidents \u00b7 5. Lung disease \u00b7 6. Pneumonia and influenza \u00b7 7. Diabetes mellitus \u00b7 8. Suicide \u00b7 9. Liver disease \u00b7 10. Atherosclerosis.\nOf course, some other factors also influence your health and wellness. These include heredity, environment, and culture, but even these factors are affected to some extent by your life-style decisions.\n### Heredity\nTo some extent, heredity, all the traits that are passed on biologically from parent to child, determines a per son's level of wellness. These traits include hair color, eye color, height, build, and many other characteristics. Heredity also influences the soundness of your body, your reactions to stressful situations, and the aging process.\nAs you probably know, some disabilities, diseases, and tendencies toward certain illnesses are inherited. Although inherited disabilities put some limits on an individual's level of wellness, there are still many things a person can do to reach his or her optimum (ahp tuh mum) health, the highest level of wellness possible. Many disabled people are energetic and productive and enjoy a high quality of life in spite of their disabilities.\nOvercoming a disability is an extreme example of using mental, social, and physical resources to make up for a limitation. There are also less dramatic examples. For example, some people inherit a tendency toward high blood pressure, a condition that can contribute to heart disease and shorten life. If they are aware of their condition and know how to cope with it, they can make diet and other life-style changes to control their blood pressure. Their actions allow them to lead long and healthy lives in spite of this inherited tendency.\nExcept in a small number of cases, heredity does not prevent a person from enjoying a healthy life. For most people, the life-style choices they make every day are far more important than heredity in maintaining, harming, or improving their wellness.\n### Physical Environment\nYour environment is all your surroundings and the influences they have on you. To be healthy, everyone needs a healthful physical environment, or physical surroundings. You know that climate, extreme heat or cold, and extremely dry or damp air can affect your wellness. It is also true that air pollution, water pollution, radiation, and even loud noise can injure your health.\nIf you are aware of environmental hazards, you can take steps to protect yourself. You can avoid swimming in polluted water, wear a sunscreen for protection against the sun's rays, and always keep your radio's volume at less-than- harmful levels.\nYou can also take steps to make your environment healthier. Everyone should be aware of the dangers of a polluted environment and help to limit or decrease pollution. That includes disposing of waste materials correctly, bicycling or walking short distances instead of driving, and recycling paper goods, cans, and bottles. Some teenagers are part of environmental watch groups that keep track of air and water cleanliness in their communities.\nYour physical environment includes the environment indoors as well as outdoors. Your home, school, and workplace are part of your physical environment. Cigarette smoking in public places and disease-causing organisms in restaurant food are some indoor hazards of the physical environment. Your own knowledge and behavior can help make your physical environment safer. How could you and your friends contribute to improving the environment of your school cafeteria or a local park?\n### Social Environment\nYour environment is made up of more than your physical surroundings. The people around you\u2014your family, friends, and other people you spend time with\u2014make up another part of your environment, your social environment.\nWhen you were a child, your parents were the major part of your social environment. They taught you to speak and to communicate in other ways. They strongly influenced your feelings about yourself and your ideas of how to get along with other people. In addition, they probably taught you health habits that are so basic you do not even think about them anymore. Washing your hands before eating or fixing a meal, for example, may have become routine, but now you understand that these habits help to prevent the spread of germs.\n### Mind Over Illness?\nDo emotions and thoughts play a role in helping the body ward off disease? The new field of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) suggests they might. PNI researchers are now exploring the two-way connection between the brain and the immune system, the body's defense against disease. The brain's\nnetwork of nerves releases many chemicals, some of which depend on mood. These chemicals bind directly to the disease-fighting cells of the immune system and influence how the cells behave. Immune cells are more active when a person's mood is good than when he or she is depressed.\nThe immune cells send chemical messages back to the brain. These chemicals affect sleep, body temperature, heart rate, and mood.\nPNI supports common beliefs. A person with a positive attitude combats disease better than someone who has \"lost the will to live.\" Good health and a positive outlook tend to reinforce each other. While wellness may not be \"all in your mind,\" PNI has found that there is a close connection. What role does mood play in fighting disease?\nAs you have grown older, your social environment has expanded to include your neighbors and schoolmates. Your teachers, relatives, friends, and those involved in the community activities you participate in are an important part of your social environment.\nYou have probably heard a lot of talk about peer pressure. Traditionally, the word peers has meant equals, those people who are in the same situation as you. Today, it is often used to mean your friends, or a larger group of acquaintances your own age. The friends you select from among your acquaintances can have an important effect on your level of wellness. Friends who practice unhealthful behaviors can put a lot of pressure on you to do the same. It is sometimes difficult to stand up to that kind of pressure. Selecting friends who choose healthful habits and life styles makes it easier for you to choose wellness.\n### Culture\nYour social environment is only one part of your culture. Culture is all the ideas, customs, and ways of living that characterize a particular group of people. That group may be a nation, a region of a country, or an ethnic group. Culture includes accents and food preferences, attitudes and manners.\nSometimes you are not aware of the characteristics of your own culture until you come in contact with another culture. You probably do not think you have an accent until you visit a part of the country where people speak differently. In some cultures, it is rude to take off your shoes when visiting someone else's house; in other cultures it is rude not to. In some cultures, people eat little or no meat; in others, meat is central to the diet. This is just one example of how cultural differences can affect your health. Can you think of other examples?\nSometimes, you may get \"mixed messages\" from your culture. For example, our culture emphasizes the value of health and fitness. At the same time, it suggests that unhealthful behaviors, such as smoking and drinking, are fun and part of a healthful life style. You have probably seen advertisements with young, healthy-looking people trying to promote products that are not really good for your health. Because your culture offers you so many choices, you must be informed about what promotes health and what does not. This way you will be able to make your own choices without being influenced by misleading messages.\n### Section Review\n1. What are the three aspects of wellness?\n- 2. What is a holistic view of health?\n- 3. How are the three leading causes of death today different from those of 1900?\n- 4. What factors determine your health? Which of these factors can you control?\n### What Do You Think?\n- 5. What are two ways you could improve your physical health? Your mental health? Your social health?\n## 2. You and Your Health\nIf there were just a few painless habits you could choose to practice that would lead to a long and healthy life, of course you would practice them. Even if there were no absolute guarantee of good health, just a greater probability of it, the choice would still be worthwhile. Such a choice does not come from a fairy-tale land of magic potions that protects the user from disaster. It is a real choice you can make in your daily life. One way to judge the changes in your health that your daily life-style choices can make\u2014for the better as well as for the worse\u2014is to use the Illness-Wellness continuum.\n### The Illness-Wellness Continuum\ni\nRemember the last time you were coming down with, the flu? You could feel it beginning, perhaps with a runny nose or general tiredness. Then, your symptoms became worse and your energy level dropped lower. You might have run a fever and had to stay in bed. After several days, your fever broke, you felt more energetic, and your cough no longer kept you awake at night. You might have been a bit tired and sniffly still, but you were feeling better. Finally, you felt great again.\nYou moved from having the sniffles to walking around with a cold to lying in bed with a fever and cough to being up and around with a few symptoms to regaining wellness. You can think of the sequence you followed\u2014from wellness to illness and back again\u2014as a continuum (kun tin yoo um), a progression in either direction from one stage (sniffles) to another (walking around with a cold) to another, and so on.\nContinuums can represent other health-related changes in your life. How would you use a continuum to express changes you might experience when you start (or stop) an exercise program? How could a continuum show the changes brought on by your moving away from friends to a new school or by failing to make the swim team?\nYour overall wellness also can be illustrated on a continuum. This sliding scale is called the Illness-Wellness continuum. Look at Figure 1-7. Notice that on the Illness- Wellness continuum, you can move in either direction. As you move in one direction, you move toward illness; as you move the other way, you approach wellness. You can see also that there is a midpoint on the continuum. At this neutral point, a person is not sick but is not enjoying the full benefits of optimum health, either.\nAt one time, as you learned earlier, many people in this country were satisfied just to be at the neutral point of health. Then, people were much more concerned about avoiding illness than about improving the quality of their lives. Today, achieving a higher level of wellness and a better quality of life is possible for many of the people in this country. More than ever before, people today control where on the Illness- Wellness continuum they fall.\n### Risk Behaviors\nLook again at the Illness-Wellness continuum in Figure 1-7. You can see that a risk behavior, or an action that increases the chances of a harmful outcome, moves you toward the illness-early death end of the continuum. You are probably aware of many risks to your health and do your best to avoid them. For example, you know it is dangerous to run across a four-lane highway. You also know that wearing a seat belt in a car will reduce your risk of injury in case of accident, but do you always remember to use one? If you do not, you are taking a risk that moves you toward the illness- early death end of the continuum. Perhaps thinking about your behavior in these terms will change your mind about some of the unnecessary risks you take.\nMost activities have varying degrees of risk. For example, if you exercise vigorously without doing warm-ups first, you risk pulling a muscle. If you ride a motorcycle without a helmet, you risk serious injury and death.\nSometimes, risks are worth taking if there is a benefit greater than the possible harm. Skiing, for example, involves some risk of injury, but many people decide that this enjoyable and healthful activity is worth the risk. They also may realize that equipment, instruction, fitness, and attitude can lessen their risks while skiing. It is always worthwhile to think carefully about any activities that involve risks before you do them. \u0410\nNot all risk behaviors involve immediate threats to your physical safety. Eating an unbalanced diet is a risk behavior. As you may know, the typical fast-food meal contains a great deal of salt, fat, and sugar. Eating a meal like this too frequently may cause you to put on too much weight. Living on a diet of fast food may lead to more serious, long-term health problems, such as cancer and heart disease. How far along the Illness-Wellness continuum do you think one fast- food meal per week would move you? What about two meals per day? You will learn more about the effects of dietary risk factors in Chapters 8 and 9.\nAnother set of risks to your wellness involves mental and social health. Keeping anger or other strong emotions \u201cbottled up\u201d inside can risk both your mental and social well being. It is much better for your health to express your feelings by talking with someone you trust. Your relationships with others will also benefit. Strong negative feelings, when not communicated, can harm a relationship, causing resentment, jealousy, and arguments. You will learn more about the healthy expression of emotions in Chapter 2 and about communication skills in Chapter 5.\n### Moving Along the Continuum\nTo achieve a better quality of life, you need to know about, choose, and practice behaviors that promote wellness. You also should be aware of your own particular conditions and needs. Awareness is the first step toward making healthful choices and decisions. The second step is acquiring the knowledge you need to promote your own wellness. Some of this knowledge is general information, such as the benefits of regular exercise, and some knowledge may relate to your particular circumstances, such as the proper diet for gaining weight.\nYou also need to be able to distinguish between risk behaviors, which lead away from wellness, and healthful behaviors, which lead toward wellness. The last step is applying your awareness and knowledge by making healthful choices and then taking action on those choices.\nThe remainder of this chapter, and the chapters that follow, will show you how to gain an awareness of your own health, how to acquire and evaluate health-related knowledge, and how to decide which behaviors best promote your health. Finally, you will learn how to turn your decisions into a healthful life style.\n### Awareness\nHow do you become aware of your own level of wellness? In some cases, you know when you have a health problem. You know when your ankle hurts or when you have a sunburn. You are probably aware that some symptoms require medical attention and some do not.\nOther medical problems do not show up so readily. You should have regular check-ups to detect early signs of illness you might not be aware of. At these check-ups, you will probably discuss your life style, including what you eat, how much you sleep, how much exercise you do, and whether or not you smoke. Together, you and your doctor can determine if you are at risk for certain health problems because of your life-style choices.\nYou may even discuss some of your feelings with your doctor. If you are depressed, for example, it is worthwhile to discover why. Feeling \"low\" all the time can be the cause or the result of a physical problem. If you are unhappy because of something that cannot be changed, such as the death of a loved one, the support of friends or professionals may help you to understand and accept your feelings.\nLearning what questions to ask of your doctor and of yourself is an important step toward health self-awareness. The Check Your Wellness inventory at the beginning of this chapter should give you a good start. How well did you do on the inventory? What other questions might you ask yourself about your health? What questions might you ask your doctor or other health professional?\n### Knowledge\nKnowledge about health is growing every day. New discoveries and research studies appear in the news all the time. Some of this knowledge\u2014about the dangers of overexposure to sunlight, for example\u2014is important to everyone. Some, such as the development of new medications, is useful to the professionals who prescribe them. Other information, such as research on the harmful effects t of a particular fad diet, is important to people who may try it. You need to be able to sort out the knowledge that might apply to your life.\nSome sources of health information are more reliable than others. Which is a better source of knowledge, an advertisement for a quick weight-loss diet or a study of weight loss in a scholarly journal? While the answer to that question is obvious, the value of other sources of information may not be as easy to determine.\nThis book gives you a good foundation of health-related knowledge. It also suggests how you can evaluate other health information you receive. It is up to you to stay informed about things that affect your wellness. The process of updating your knowledge is one you will need to continue throughout your life.\n### Behavior Choices\nEven with awareness and knowledge, it is not always easy to decide on the best course of action. In the earlier discussion of risks, the action of running across a highway presents a clear risk, but the skiing example is more complicated. Many behaviors have both positive and negative results, and you must choose between them. Sup pose you were an inexperienced skier invited to ski a run known for its difficulty. Your best friend, a good skier, could not go on the trip if you. did not go. Add some more complications, such as bad weather, or an upcoming exam for which you need to study, or alcohol being consumed in the car. Real life is full of such complications. How would you decide what to do?\nAwareness of your own skiing ability is essential in this example. Knowledge of the dangers of driving or skiing in bad weather is also important, but even more important is knowledge about the extreme risk of drinking and driving. But, what about your friend or your exam? Here you must consider your values, the things most important to you. You value friendship, but you also value your own and your friend's safety. You value doing well in school, and so do your parents. Your decisions not only affect you, they affect other people, their health, and their values. The DECIDE process described in the Health Skills on page 16 provides a step-by-step procedure that can help to make hard decisions easier. Look at the DECIDE process and review the steps. How could you apply these steps to the skiing example?\n### Skills\nWhat would you think of a baseball team that spent all its time thinking and learning about the game but never played? Do you think that the team would win many games without practice? Of course not. Many people think that knowing about healthful behavior is enough to guarantee good health. This is not true. Like the baseball players, 4 you have to practice. To have good health, you must apply the healthful decisions you have made.\nOne quality a successful baseball player needs is skill. Awareness of natural talent, knowledge of the game, and a good choice of bat are not much good without the skill to hit a curve ball or lay down a bunt. How do baseball players develop new skills? They usually begin by observing and analyzing their current behavior. Next, they make changes. Then, there is practice and more practice.\nJust like the baseball player who worked to change his or her swing, you may have some habits you wish to change. A habit is a pattern of behavior that has become automatic and is hard to break. It is possible, however, to break old habits by learning new skills. With practice, your new skills will become just as natural as the old habits had been. The Health Skills in this book will help you to develop the skills you need to put decisions for wellness into action.\n### Section Review\n1. What is the Illness-Wellness continuum?\n- 2. What is a risk behavior? Give an example of an immediate risk and a long-term risk.\n- 3. What steps should a person take to move toward the wellness side of the Illness-Wellness continuum?\n### What Do You Think?\n- 4. Where do you think you are on the Illness-Wellness continuum? List five behaviors that you currently practice that influence your level of wellness. A\n## 3. Taking Control of Your Health\nNow is the time for you to start taking control of your own health. In the last few years, as you have become more physically and emotionally mature, you have also become more independent. You have begun to make many of the decisions that used to be made for you by your parents and other adults. How many of your own food choices do you now make, for example? Who decides how much exercise you should do? Who chooses your friends? Who decides what yo a do with your friends? More and more, the answer is you.\n### Accepting Responsibility\nNow that you have so much control over your own life, you also need to accept responsibility for it. Begin by learning the answers to these two questions: What are the leading causes of death among teenagers today? What are the risk behaviors associated with these deaths?\n> Figure 1-11 \u2014 Leading causes of death among teenagers. 1. Accidents \u00b7 2. Suicide \u00b7 3. Homicide \u00b7 4. Cancer \u00b7 5. Heart disease \u00b7 6. Birth defects \u00b7 7. Stroke \u00b7 8. Pneumonia and influenza \u00b7 9. Lung disease \u00b7 10. Diabetes mellitus.\nIn Figure 1-11, you can see that the three most common causes of teenage death are not illness. Would you be surprised to learn that there is a risk behavior common to all three? That risk behavior is substance abuse, the use of alcohol or drugs. Most fatal accidents, for example, involve cars, and nearly half of all car accidents involve alcohol or drugs. Many suicides, too, are related to substance abuse. Homicide also is often tied to drugs and alcohol. The impaired judgment of people under the influence of drugs or alcohol can lead to violent behavior.\nSome other risk behaviors also contribute to the rate of death among teenagers. These include: taking chances for the fun of it; being unwilling or unable to talk about problems or to ask for help; and accepting a known risk just to be one of the crowd. You will learn more about each of these risk behaviors throughout this book.\nSome of these risk behaviors contribute to another set of health threats to teenagers: unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. All of these problems have a major impact on physical, mental, and social health. They affect not only the quality of your life but that of others. Making responsible decisions about relationships of all kinds, including sexual ones, is an important sign of maturity. It shows that you are beginning to take control of your own health. Thinking about the possible effects of your actions before you take them may be difficult, but it is an important thing to do.\n### Looking Ahead\nConsidering the long-term effects of your behavior is another sign of maturity. Earlier in this chapter, you looked at the statistics on life expectancy and causes of death for adults today. The decisions you make and the behaviors you practice now are already influencing the length and quality of life you can expect in the future.\nThe most common killers of adults today are health conditions that can be strongly influenced by life style. Life-style choices include diet, exercise, and the use of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs. Your current and future health depend largely on the decisions you are starting to make now. Learn ing to make decisions for wellness and to practice healthful behaviors is a wise investment that you can make in yourself and your future. It is an investment that pays the highest reward\u2014the reward of good health.\n### Section Review\n1. What are the three most common causes of teenage death today?\n- 2. What kind of accidents kill the most teenagers?\n- 3. What risk behavior is often associated with the three leading causes of teenage death?\n### What Do You Think?\n- 4. What life-style changes could you make now to improve your future quality of life?\n## Health Skills: Making a Decision\nSuppose you had to make this decision: You've just found the perfect after-school job. It's near home, it's fun to do, and it will pay for the bicycle you need for your bicycling trip next summer. Then you make the basketball team that you've tried out for three times. Unfortunately, the team practices during the same hours as your job. How should you choose between the team and the job?\nAlthough many of your choices are not this complicated, you sometimes face even harder decisions. They require much thought and soul-searching because they can make important differences in your life. Do you sometimes \"hide from\" tough choices because they make you feel anxious? Do you ever rush headlong into decisions without really thinking them through? There is a process, called DECIDE, that makes decision-making easier. This process is simple to remember because each letter in the word DECIDE stands for a step in the process.\n### 1. Define the Problem\nLook carefully at the decision you are facing, and state the issue clearly. Is it important and complex enough to warrant using DECIDE? Some choices are too easy. You already know what to do. Others don't really make much difference, a flip of a coin would do.\n### 2. Explore the Alternatives\nMake a list of all possible alternatives for solving your problem. Be sure to include \"doing nothing\" if it is appropriate. If you need more information to fully understand some alternatives, do the research now. You may find some choices unrealistic; do not include them.\n### 3. Consider the Consequences\nOne by one, think through what might happen with each alternative. List both positive and negative results. Consider what probably would happen, not what you hope would happen. Ask yourself: How risky is each alternative? What are its chances of success? How would it affect my future? Re member to consider the effects on other people.\n### 4. Identify Your Values\nYour values, the things you believe in strongly, affect how you live your life and how you feel about yourself. Sometimes, your values- influence your decisions even when you are not aware of them. At other times, you may overlook your values when you want something badly. When you do this, though, your values often affect how you feel about the decision later on. Think about your long-term goals as well as the beliefs of your family, religion, and community. Consider your own and others' health and safety, and yourself-respect. Which of the choices are most in line with your values?\n### 5. Decide and Act\nUse the information you have collected to compare each of the alternatives. Decide which one is best for you. Act on your decision by first breaking it down into smaller steps, and then setting a realistic deadline for accomplishing each step. Then, follow through with your plan.\n### 6. Evaluate the Results\nHow did your decision work out? What are its effects on your life? On others? What did you learn? What would you do differently? If you can change some aspect of the result for the better, do it now.\n### Apply the Skill\n- Imagine that you face the decision introduced at the beginning of this feature \u2014 to choose the job or the team. Follow the steps of DECIDE to determine what you would do in this situation. Write out your answers for steps 1 through 5. Be sure to consider all alternatives; there may be more than two. (For example, it may be possible to postpone a choice or to take another route to a goal.) Don't forget to include the step to act on your decision.\n- List other difficult, important decisions for which DECIDE might be useful. Do they fall into categories? What categories of decisions would not be suitable for DECIDE?\n- Set up a possible situation like the one in the beginning of this feature. In other words, imagine a person facing a complicated, important decision. Include enough information about the problem to show that it is a tough choice. Then use DECIDE to work through the decision-making process. Remember, at times there is more than one \"right\" choice. Your particular values, skills, background, and preferences all help determine what is right for you.\n- Consider a tough decision you have made in the past or one you are facing now. Use DECIDE to determine what you should do (or should have done). Write out steps 1 through 5. Did DECIDE help you focus on important values or choices you might otherwise have overlooked? Which ones? Did DECIDE make the decision-making process easier? Why or why not?\n## Chapter Review\n### Chapter Summary\n- Health is more than the absence of disease; it is the well-being of your body, mind, and relationships with other people.\n- The holistic concept of wellness emphasizes the connection between physical health, mental health, and social health.\n- Your behavior, or life style, has the strongest influence on your level of wellness. Other factors that influence your level of wellness include heredity, physical and social environment, and culture.\n- Your level of wellness can be illustrated on a continuum known as the Illness-Wellness continuum. As you move in one direction, you move toward illness or early death. As you move in the other direction, you move toward overall wellness. At the midpoint, you are neither ill nor well.\n- Risk behaviors increase the chances of illness or death. It is important to analyze the risks of an activity before doing it.\n- You can change your level of wellness by increasing your self-awareness, acquiring knowledge, making healthful behavior choices, and practicing and using skills.\n- The major health hazards for teenagers include accidents, homicide, suicide, unwanted pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and drug and alcohol abuse.\n- The life-style decisions you make and carry out now affect both your current level of wellness and your future quality of life.\n### Vocabulary Review\nListed below are some of the important terms in this chapter. Choose the phrase that best describes the term in the exercise that follows.\n> continuum \u00b7 culture \u00b7 environment \u00b7 goal \u00b7 habit \u00b7 heredity \u00b7 holistic \u00b7 Illness-Wellness continuum \u00b7 life style \u00b7 optimum health \u00b7 physical environment \u00b7 quality of life \u00b7 risk behavior \u00b7 values \u00b7 wellness\n- 1. the way or style in which you choose to live your life\n- 2. all your surroundings and the influence they have on you\n- 3. the well-being of your body, mind, and relationships with other people\n- 4. a sliding scale that illustrates your overall level of wellness\n- 5. whole\n- 6. an action that increases the chance of a harmful outcome\n- 7. all the traits passed on biologically from parent to child\n- 8. a pattern of behavior that has become automatic and hard to change\n- 9. all the ideas, customs, and ways of living that characterize a group of people\n- 10. the highest level of wellness\n### What Have You Learned?\n- 1. Briefly describe three characteristics of mental health.\n- 2. Give an example of how the three aspects of health are interrelated.\n- 3. How much has the average life expectancy of Americans increased since 1900?\n- 4. How can heredity affect your overall level of health?\n- 5. List three possible health hazards in the physical environment. Explain how you can protect yourself from them.\n- 6. Define peer pressure and explain how it can affect your health.\n- 7. Use a continuum to illustrate a health-related change in your life.\n- 8. List three risk behaviors that can be fatal.\n- 9. Briefly describe a situation in which a risk is worth taking and explain why.\n- 10. What are two ways to become aware of your own level of wellness?\n- 11. What are two good sources of knowledge about health?\n- 12. Explain how values can affect a health-related decision.\n### What Do You Think?\n- 1. Describe a problem you recently had to face. Then explain how your physical, mental, and social well-being played a part in reacting to the problem and in resolving it.\n- 2. In spite of all the knowledge available about the health risks of smoking, many teenagers still smoke. Why do you think this is so? What argument against smoking do you think would be the most effective for teens?\n- 3. Compare a TV, magazine, or newspaper ad promoting a healthful behavior with one for an unhealthful activity. How do the ads try to influence your behavior?\n- 4. Some people say that teenagers do not take the dangers of risk behaviors seriously. They behave as though they think that harm only comes to other people. Do you think this is true or not? Give three examples to support your opinion.\n- 5. Give some thought to the term quality of life. What five elements do you think are most important to your quality of life? Why?\n### What Would You Do?\n- 1. You have a friend who lives on junk food and smokes cigarettes. He says he knows these behaviors are not harming him because he feels fine. What would you tell him?\n- 2. You are not getting along with your friends or family. Often, you want to be alone. Should you seek help? From whom? Explain.\n- 3. All your friends are drinking a diet supplement instead of eating regular meals. When you ask about the diet, they give you the brochure that came with the supplement. How would you make a well-informed decision about this diet?\n- 4. You are happy with your current state of wellness, but you want to be healthy in the future, too. What actions can you take now to promote your future well-being?\n- 5. You have diabetes, a condition that limits the amount of sugar your body can process. You need to restrict your diet and check your blood-sugar levels. How can you achieve optimum wellness?\n### For Further Study\n- 1. Find out what is meant by the term preventive medicine. How does preventive medicine lead to optimum health?\n- 2. Research the disease tuberculosis. Find out the cause of the disease and what environmental and social conditions led to its being a \"killer disease\" in 1900. Then, explain why tuberculosis of the lungs, or consumption, is no longer a major threat in this country.\n- 3. Look in the library for reliable sources of information about health; ask a librarian for help, if necessary. Select three sources and explain why they are reliable." },
{ title: "